[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
naga manchetti and charlie state our
headlines today
a helpline is launched and the
government announces a review into
sexual abuse in schools after
thousands of allegations from students
france
is about to enter a third national
lockdown as coveted cases continue to
rise
calls to crack down on those who litter
as lockdown restrictions ease
after piles of rubbish were left in
parks and on beaches
millions set for a pay rise good morning
as the national living and minimum wage
go up but
some council tax and energy bills are
set to rise how are you set for the new
tax year
good morning england left it late but in
the end a rocket from harry maguire
edged them to
victory over poland in the latest world
cup qualifiers while scotland secured
their first win
and making a difference for motor
neurone disease after raising more than
two million pounds rugby league legend
kevin sinfield
finds out how the money will help
families
good morning from the national trust
australia park in london we're here to
see the blossom this morning
it's a cold start fairly cloudy for most
but it will be dry
and some of us will see some sunshine
out of all the details
coming up
[Music]
good morning it's thursday the 1st of
april a new nspcc helpline offering
advice
and support to those who have been
sexually abused or harassed
in schools launches this morning it
comes after thousands of current and
former pupils went online to share
their experiences an immediate review of
safeguarding policies
both state and private schools in
england is to be carried out by ofsted
our education correspondent dan johnson
has this report
if you were walking upstairs and there
was a group of boys behind you
it was pretty normal to be groped these
are young women
finally given a voice i got pressured
into doing some stuff i was really
uncomfortable with
via facetime and such there are now more
than 11 000 of these
anonymous accounts he put his hand down
my skirt
i didn't talk to anyone about it for a
year harassment
abuse and assault mostly by their own
classmates
there have been protests and walkouts
and a sense some schools have protected
reputations
before pupils now there will be action
this i feel is a real watershed
moment i think there's lots more young
people who haven't necessarily felt able
to come forward so
the potential is there that you know
this could just be the tip of the
iceberg
but we are very much prepared to support
young people
through this and ensure that their
voices are being heard
what we wanted to do is take immediate
action that's why working with the nspcc
we have set up a helpline in order to be
able to support victims
but why we're wanting to go further and
that is why we have asked ofsted
to be able to conduct a full review in
terms of safeguarding
in our schools to protect the best
interests of our children
they're aware this could eclipse any
previous major scandal
and it may raise wider issues about male
attitudes
and the standard of sex and relationship
education
it needs to tackle topics like
pornography consent
what constitutes a healthy or an
unhealthy relationship
and i'm afraid that young people are
still saying it's not good enough there
are those gaps
in the curriculum this national
conversation about how some men treat
women
now reaches to the youngest who haven't
felt safe
even at school dan johnson bbc news
council bosses in nottingham have closed
two parks after footage emerged of
people drinking
and ignoring social distancing rules
other towns and cities have also
seen crowds descend on parks and beaches
after the easing of lockdown
restrictions leading to reports of
anti-social behavior and
littering our reporter guitar pensay is
in nottingham forest this morning and
many people
had been enjoying the lovely weather
that we've had the last couple of days
and be really disappointed
that the parks now at least those two
are closed
yeah absolutely naga i mean it's very
quiet as you'd imagine
here this morning but that's the way it
will stay because nottingham city
council
have closed two parks in the city
because of mass gatherings
that have taken place this week so here
at the arboretum which is
right in the heart of the city centre we
saw footage emerge of large crowds
gathering with very little social
distancing on monday
some people were drinking others were
fighting and we even saw people climbing
trees it was described as a frenzy
uh the following night on tuesday night
in another park close by there were
large gatherings there too which led to
a huge cleanup operation
the following day and this issue with
litter is something we're seeing in
other parts of the uk too so we have
seen images of litter in parks in
sheffield
in leeds at hyde park corner in london
and like you say understandably people
want to get out to enjoy the warm
weather
but officials are saying that we must
stick to the current restrictions that
we can only meet in groups
of up to six people or two households
mixing and they say that's
as much about safety as it is about the
the impact
on the cleanup operation for people how
to deal with the litter the following
day
here in nottingham as we said two parks
are now closed and the council leader
says that he does regret
having to take that action when so many
people were looking forward to enjoying
green spaces like this one the arboretum
in the city center and he says it's
because of the actions of a
small thoughtless minority that spoiled
that
guitar thanks so much guitar pencil
there for us in nottingham
more coronavirus sorry parts of the
economy are also reopening
in wales over the next few weeks the
easing will begin
no earlier than april the 12th when all
pupils and students can return to school
or university let's speak now to our
correspondent mark hutchins who's in
cardiff for us
this morning so mark there'll be a great
deal of attention on
what might change next i know there is a
road map in place what are you expecting
to hear today
uh well i've taken the liberty of
writing them down because there are a
whole load of uh
dates that are being released today by
uh the welsh government
uh it's true that some activities have
opened up
ahead of the rest of the uk uh by now
but uh critics of the welsh government
have said that the uh
the plan has been thin on dates well
today we've got oodles of them so
it's been confirmed that from april the
12th all peoples will be called back to
school and that uh travel
in and out of wales so people in the uk
will be allowed and that'll be a boost
for the tourism industry
and let's look now at the the new dates
april 26
stands out when outdoor attractions can
open
along with outdoor hospitality like beer
garden so that is
two weeks behind the current plan for
england uh on may the 3rd
organized outdoor activities can resume
for up to 30 people
and wedding receptions can take place
outdoors again
for up to 30 people a week after that
gyms and leisure centers can open
for individual training but not for
group exercises
and two households can meet indoors and
then on may the 17th
the plan is for a return for indoor
activities and after that the welsh
government say they will look at
indoor hospitality ahead of the spring
bank holiday
and all this comes with a caveat that
public health conditions continue to be
met
at one other date for your diary may the
sixth that's when the senate elections
take place
and that will determine the formation of
the next welsh government
and whether i'll have to amend my notes
or not mark thank you very much
more coronavirus lockdown restrictions
are being used in northern ireland
today up to six people from no more than
two households can now meet outdoors or
in a private garden
ten people from no more than two
households can take part in outdoor
sporting activities
and golf courses and tennis courts can
reopen
fewer than one in five people request a
code test if they have symptoms
and the number who follow self-isolation
rules is low this is according to a
study by king's college london
the research also revealed that a year
into the pandemic just half of those
asked could identify the main
coronavirus symptoms here's more from
our health correspondent dominic hughes
if you have symptoms you need to get a
test immediately
the test and trace system has been a key
part of the government's strategy in the
fight against the coronavirus
and will be equally important in the
months to come
but a series of surveys involving more
than 50 000 people across the uk
reveals some worrying findings
overall fewer than one in five said they
would request a test
if they develop symptoms of coronavirus
only
half could identify the main symptoms of
covid19 which include a cough
high temperature and a loss of taste or
smell
and while 70 percent of people said if
they were to develop symptoms they
intended to self-isolate
the reality was that fewer than half
reported
that they did in fact do so i think that
it's important to remember that all of
these
behaviors are really complex staying at
home and self-isolating is actually a
really difficult behavior to do
and there are lots of different reasons
why people may not be able to do it it
might be that they need to go out to
work
they need to go out to care for someone
they need to go out to bring their kids
to school they need to go out to get
food
for their family or medicines for their
family and it's not really a
one-size-fits-all
solution
the report raises doubts about the
impact of a much
criticized 37 billion pound test and
trade system
the government says test and trace has
saved countless lives since it was
introduced
and maintains the overwhelming majority
of people self-isolate when asked to
but given the central role the system
will play in the uk's recovery from the
pandemic
there will be concerns if it's still
performing poorly
dominic hughes bbc news
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news